# The Best American Essays 2018

## Prospects for Survival

Like it or not, we happen to be living in the most extraordinary period of human history.

In recent years, humans have constructed two huge sledgehammers poised to destroy us, with others waiting in the wings. Along with these achievements, the dominant forces in global society have instituted policies that systematically erode the best line of defense against self-destruction. In brief, human intelligence has created a perfect storm. If it continues to rage, the human experiment is unlikely to survive very long.

It appears that we are dedicating ourselves to confirming a grim thesis formulated by one of the leading modern biologists, the late Ernst Mayr. He was considering the possibility of finding intelligent life elsewhere in the universe, and concluded that the prospects were dim. His reasons have considerable bearing on our current plight.

Mayr observes that we have one sample: Earth. There have been, he estimates, about fifty billion species on Earth, so we have fairly good evidence on biological success. The evidence, he argues, is quite clear. The most successful organisms are those that mutate quickly, like bacteria, or that have fixed niches to which they keep, whatever happens, like beetles. As we move up the scale of what we call intelligence, biological success declines. Large mammals never did very well. Humans are a statistical blip in the past few hundred years. The history of life on Earth, Mayr concludes, refutes the claim that “it is better to be smart than to be stupid.” In other words, what we call intelligence may be a lethal mutation.

Mayr adds that the average life span for a species is about a hundred thousand years.

Modern humans emerged about two hundred thousand years ago. They now appear to be engaged in a dedicated effort to confirm Mayr’s thesis—to show that we have perhaps outlived our allotted time on Earth. This enterprise has been under way particularly since the end of World War II, when two imminent threats to survival were constructed by human intelligence, and followed by systematic erosion of the means of defense.

The two awesome challenges to decent survival are, of course, nuclear weapons and environmental catastrophe. The best defense would be a functioning democracy in which informed and engaged citizens join together to develop means to overcome the threats—as can be done. However, policy making during the neoliberal years of the past generation has significantly enhanced the threats. For principled reasons, the policies enacted tend to exclude the general population from participation in policy formation, often even awareness. These policies have sharply concentrated wealth, and thereby political power, undermining institutions that might be responsive to the public will. They are well designed to diminish authentic democracy. Associated with the erosion of democracy is principled assault on an effective regulatory apparatus that might mitigate the threats. In the most powerful country in world history, the leader of the free world, we see all of this very dramatically right now.

But the roots run deep.

Let me try to bring together some strands of recent history that intertwine, I think, in order to show that a perfect storm is all too plausible.

The end of World War II was one of the most important moments in human history. It was a time of joy, and also of horror, with the dawn of the nuclear age, an age overshadowed by the dark realization that human intelligence had created the means for terminal destruction.

It was not understood at the time, but the end of World War II also signaled the beginning of another era that threatens organized human existence: the Anthropocene, a new geological epoch in which human activity is dramatically changing the environment. There have been debates about its inception. The World Geological Society has settled on 1950, partly because of radioactive elements dispersed across the planet by nuclear bomb tests, but also other consequences of human action, including a sharp increase in greenhouse emissions. So the nuclear age and the Anthropocene coincide.

One index of the severity and imminence of crisis is provided graphically by the famous Doomsday Clock of the *Bulletin of Atomic Scientists.* Scientists and political analysts meet regularly to evaluate the state of the world and to determine how close we are to terminal disaster, midnight on the clock. The clock was first set in 1947, with the minute hand at seven minutes to midnight. In 1953, after the USSR exploded an H-bomb, following a much larger H-bomb explosion by the United States, it was advanced to two minutes to midnight. It has oscillated since. In 2015–16 the hand was again moved forward, and set at three minutes to midnight—the closest we had been to terminal disaster since the early 1980s, when there was a major war scare. The reasons in 2015–16 were the mounting threat of nuclear war and the failure to deal with climate change, which had not been considered before. In the wording that accompanied the setting of the clock, “The probability of global catastrophe is very high, and the actions needed to reduce the risks of disaster must be taken very soon.” That was 2016.

At the outset of the Trump term, the analysts reset the clock, moving the hand still closer to midnight. The reason, in their words, is that they found “the danger to be even greater, the need for action more urgent. It is two and a half minutes to midnight, the Clock is ticking, global danger looms”—the closest to terminal disaster since 1953, when the United States and the USSR tested H-bombs.

That earlier close brush with terminal disaster is worth attention. It tells us a good deal about policy making and world order.

The obvious question is: Was the crisis avoidable, and what efforts were made to avoid it? The answer is startling, and fraught with grim lessons for today.

At the end of World War II, the United States was remarkably secure. It controlled the entire hemisphere, both oceans, and the opposite sides of both oceans. It enjoyed overwhelming economic and military superiority. It largely controlled the major industrial states, which had been severely weakened or almost destroyed by the war, while the American economy boomed: industrial production almost quadrupled, and the basis was laid for rapid postwar expansion. The United States had long had by far the largest economy in the world, with unique advantages, but had not been a major player in world affairs, ceding that role to Britain and France. The war left the United States in a position of power with no historical precedent.

Though the United States was indeed remarkably secure, there was one potential threat: ICBMs with nuclear warheads. They did not yet exist, but surely would. There is a standard scholarly study of nuclear strategy by McGeorge Bundy, national security adviser in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, who had extensive access to internal documents. Bundy’s *Danger and Survival: Choices About the Bomb in the First Fifty Years* does touch briefly on the possibility of averting the one potential threat to US security. Briefly, because the possibility was apparently ignored. As he writes, “I am aware of no serious contemporary proposal, in or out of either government, that ballistic missiles should somehow be banned by agreement.”

That comment deserves close attention. It may be one of the most remarkable and revealing statements in all of the relevant literature on this subject. In short, there was apparently no thought of trying to prevent the sole serious threat to the United States, the threat of utter destruction. Security for the citizenry is a marginal concern, even for its security from instant destruction. Rather, the institutional imperatives of state power prevailed. Furthermore, the potential victims, the population, were left completely in the dark—and still are. Though all of this is public, it is unknown.

Let’s look further. Were there some possibilities for diplomatic initiatives to avert the threat of destruction? We cannot be sure, because apparent opportunities were ignored. One was in March 1952, right at the time of the events that moved the clock to two minutes to midnight. Stalin made a remarkable offer: he proposed unification of Germany, which would have largely ended the Cold War. A settlement might have led to elections, which the Communists were sure to lose. There was one crucial condition: that a reunified Germany not join NATO, a hostile military alliance—hardly an extreme demand in the light of recent history.

Stalin’s offer was taken seriously by the eminent and respected foreign policy analyst James Warburg, particularly in his important 1953 book *Germany: Key to Peace.* He was ignored. Later references to the possibility were dismissed with ridicule, as I can recall even from personal experience.

Since the Russian archives were opened, attitudes of scholarship have changed. The bitterly anti-Communist Soviet scholar Adam Ulam took the status of Stalin’s proposal to be an “unresolved mystery.” Washington “wasted little effort in flatly rejecting Moscow’s initiative,” he writes, on grounds that “were embarrassingly unconvincing,” leaving open “the basic

question”: “Was Stalin genuinely ready to sacrifice the newly created German Democratic Republic (GDR) on the altar of real democracy?,” with consequences for world peace and for American security that could have been enormous? One of the most prominent Cold War scholars, Melvyn Leffler, writes that scholars who have studied documents released from Soviet archives were surprised to discover that “[Lavrenti] Beria—the sinister, brutal head of the secret police—propos[ed] that the Kremlin offer the West a deal on the unification and neutralization of Germany,” agreeing “to sacrifice the East German communist regime to reduce East-West tensions” and improve internal political and economic conditions in Russia —opportunities that were squandered in favor of securing German participation in NATO.

Were these possibilities real? We cannot be sure, of course. What does seem clear is that what mattered was global power, not security for the irrelevant and uninformed population.

The episode illustrates one of the starkest and most consistent lessons of policy formation. There is much talk of security, but it is not about security of the population, which is at most a marginal concern: rather, it is about security for systems of power, state and private. The topic is much too large to review in detail, but let’s proceed for a few more years into the 1950s and ’60s.

Not long after Stalin’s death, Nikita Khrushchev took power. Khrushchev was committed to economic development and understood very well that it would be severely hampered by an arms race with the far richer United States (and with western Europe, which alone more than matched the Russian economy). He therefore proposed sharp mutual reduction in offensive weaponry, and, when he received no response, undertook it unilaterally.

What happened next is described by the late Kenneth Waltz, one of the most respected international relations scholars. After considering Khrushchev’s offer, he writes, the Kennedy administration “undertook the largest strategic and conventional peacetime military build-up the world has yet seen . . . even as Khrushchev was trying at once to carry through a major reduction in the conventional forces and to follow a strategy of minimum deterrence, and we did so even though the balance of strategic weapons greatly favored the United States.”

There was a Russian response. Khrushchev sent missiles to Cuba in October 1962 to try to compensate slightly for the strategic imbalance that

was greatly enhanced by Kennedy’s huge military buildup. A second reason, it appears, was to defend Cuba against the murderous Kennedy terrorist campaign against Cuba, which was to culminate in a likely US invasion in October 1962. What followed did almost lead to terminal disaster.

Once again, the decisions made harmed national security severely while enhancing state power. What happened was concealed behind the enthusiastic rhetoric of the Camelot years. And largely remains so, serious scholarship apart.

The crucial conclusion is once again glaringly clear: security of the population is not a major concern of planners. The conclusion prevails right to the present moment. When investigating foreign affairs and government decisions, we routinely discover that peaceful options exist, but are dismissed, though they might well avert disaster. There is no time to review the record, but let’s turn to today’s headlines.

Today, we are instructed that the great challenge faced by the world is how to compel North Korea to freeze its nuclear and missile programs. Perhaps we should resort to more sanctions, cyberwar, intimidation, an antimissile system that China realistically regards as a serious threat, even perhaps direct attack.

Another possible option was ignored as the crisis developed, and has only belatedly and often misleadingly been mentioned: accept North Korea’s offer to do exactly what we had been demanding. China and North Korea had proposed that North Korea freeze nuclear and missile programs. Their reasons are much like Khrushchev’s. North Korean leaders are seeking economic development, and understand that they cannot make much progress while facing the overwhelming burden of military production.

The North Korean proposal was rejected at once by Washington, just as it had been two years earlier—and just as Khrushchev’s initiatives were rejected by the JFK administration, leading to the closest brush with total disaster in human history.

The reason for the instant rejection is that the Chinese–North Korean proposal has a quid pro quo: it calls on the United States to halt its threatening military exercises on North Korea’s borders, including simulated nuclear-bombing attacks by B-52s, sent by Trump in recent months.

The Chinese–North Korean demand is hardly unreasonable. North Koreans, of course, remember that their country was literally flattened by US bombing, and some may well remember the gleeful reports in American

military journals about the bombing of major dams when there were no other targets left, the rejoicing about the exciting spectacle of a huge flood of water wiping out the rice crops on which Asians depend for survival—very much worth reading. A part of history that it would be useful to retrieve from the memory hole and to ponder.

The Chinese–North Korean proposal could lay the basis for more far- reaching negotiations to radically reduce the threats and perhaps even bring the crisis to an end. Contrary to much inflamed commentary, there are reasons to think that negotiations might succeed, so the record reveals.

But the offers are rejected in the usual interests of securing power interests.

Let’s look further into how we are carrying forward our verification of Mayr’s thesis.

Last March, the *Bulletin of Atomic Scientists* published a remarkable report on the vast nuclear modernization program initiated by President Obama and now being carried forward under Trump. The report discusses how US nuclear force modernization is undermining the strategic stability on which survival suspends, by a slender thread.

The current modernization programs include “revolutionary new technologies that will vastly increase the targeting capability of the US ballistic missile arsenal. This increase in capability is astonishing—boosting the overall killing power of existing US ballistic missile forces by a factor of roughly three—and it creates exactly what one would expect to see, if a nuclear-armed state were planning to have the capacity to fight and win a nuclear war by disarming enemies with a surprise first strike.”

All of this has “revolutionary impact on military capabilities and important implications for global security,” the report continues. The implications are clear. Russian strategic analysts are of course aware that the US now has the capacity to wipe out their deterrent. The Russians do not have our sophisticated satellite-based advance warning systems, and would have little advance notice of a possible attack. With the deterrent at serious risk because of the nuclear modernization programs, at a moment of crisis— and there are all too many possibilities—Russian leaders may be tempted to undertake a preemptive strike just to assure survival, an act that would end organized human life on Earth.

Once again, is a diplomatic avenue possible? It surely seems so. Is it being pursued? If so, it’s not detectable.

All relevant to Mayr’s thesis.

Turning to the second existential threat, global warming, anyone with eyes open should be aware that the dangers are severe, and imminent. How are we reacting? Here’s a recent report from the US business press (*Bloomberg,* March 2): “The boom looks like it’s back. The number of oil and gas rigs drilling in the US has almost doubled . . . While two dozen nations are coordinating to cut oil production and rein in the global supply glut, US producers are moving in the opposite direction. Over the last four months, output increased by half a million barrels a day. If that rate of expansion continues, the shale boom will break new production records by summer. The US now produces nine million barrels a day.”

The report, one of a flood, illustrates a remarkable fact of current history: while the world is taking halting steps toward facing the existential challenge to survival, the richest and most powerful state in world history, virtually alone, is racing toward destruction, with enthusiasm and dedication. That has been true since November 8, 2016, another date of great historical significance.

There were three significant events on that date, one important, one extremely important, one astonishing.

The important event was the US election, which virtually monopolized reporting for days.

The extremely important event, which received virtually no coverage, took place in Marrakesh, Morocco, where almost all nations of the world were meeting to try to put some teeth in the Paris agreements (COP 21, December 2015). A verifiable treaty could not be reached in Paris, as had been hoped, because the US Republican Congress would not accept it. On November 8, the World Meteorological Organization issued a review of the state of the climate. Along with other dire reports, the review confirmed “that 2016 was the warmest year on record: a remarkable 1.1 [degrees] C above the pre- industrial period,” sharply above the previous record set in 2015, approaching the desired limit set in Paris. Deliberations effectively ended on November 8. The operative question became: Can we survive with the leader of the free world racing toward the precipice? The countries of the world turned to China as the hope for survival. China!

The astonishing event is the dog that didn’t bark, the reaction to these amazing events: silence.

No less astonishing is that while the richest and most powerful country in history is leading the effort to intensify the likely disaster, efforts to avert catastrophe are being led, worldwide, by what we call “primitive societies”: First Nations in Canada, tribal and aboriginal societies around the world. Ecuador, with its large indigenous population, sought aid from the rich European countries to allow it to keep some of its oil reserves underground, where they should be. The aid was refused. Ecuador revised its constitution in 2008 to include “rights of nature” as having “intrinsic worth.” Bolivia, with an indigenous majority, passed the Law of Mother Earth, granting nature rights equal to humans. In general, indigenous populations are well in the lead in seeking to preserve the planet. The countries that have driven indigenous populations to extinction or extreme marginalization are racing toward destruction.

Perhaps something else we should think about.

There should be no need to sample the grim reports on threats to the environment that appear regularly in science journals, sometimes making it to major media. Meanwhile, the Republican wrecking ball is systematically dismantling the structures that offer hope for decent survival. The Environmental Protection Agency, established by Richard Nixon, is being virtually dismantled. More important still is the Department of Energy. Its Office of Science is scheduled to lose $900 million, nearly 20 percent of its budget. Even mention of climate change is coming under a ban, while regulations are being dismantled and every effort is being made to maximize the use of fossil fuels, including the most destructive, like coal.

It’s not just Trump. In the Republican presidential primaries, every candidate either denied that what is happening is happening or—the moderates—said maybe it is, but we shouldn’t do anything about it. There is virtual unanimity among party leaders. A remarkable spectacle, which passed with little notice.

The major media play along in other ways. A Fairness and Accuracy in Media (FAIR) study of interviews and press conferences with Trump since he took office on January 20, 2017, found that not a single question had been raised about climate change. Hardly surprising. After all, it’s only the most

significant policy position of the administration, enhancing a truly existential threat.

Even if sea level rise is more limited than what is anticipated, it will inundate coastal cities and coastal plains, as in Bangladesh, where tens of millions may be forced to flee in the fairly near future, many more later. Today’s refugee issues will be a tea party in comparison. The chief environmental scientist in Bangladesh has said that “these migrants should have the right to move to the countries from which all these greenhouse gases are coming. Millions should be able to go to the United States.” That certainly agrees with the current mood in the West—and not just the United States, which is extreme (or Britain). Those who think it is better on the Continent can turn to a recent poll showing that a majority of Europeans want a total ban on immigration from Muslim-majority countries.

In general, the idea is that first we destroy them and then we punish them for trying to escape from the ruins—calling it a “refugee crisis” while thousands drown in the Mediterranean fleeing from Africa, where Europe does have a certain history. In fact, the so-called refugee crisis is actually a serious moral-cultural crisis—in the West.

Let’s return to the other sledgehammer, the nuclear threat. The major nuclear powers, the United States and Russia, are both expanding their arsenals, in quite dangerous ways. And flashpoints are becoming more serious, particularly on the Russian border. On the *Russian* border, not the Mexican border—a result of the expansion of NATO right after the collapse of the USSR, in violation of verbal promises to Gorbachev that NATO would not expand “one inch to the East.” At the time, the immediate referent was East Germany—if Gorbachev agreed to unification of Germany within a hostile military alliance, a pretty remarkable concession in the light of history. Gorbachev’s vision of a European common home, a security system from Brussels to Vladivostok with no military alliances, is a fading dream.

George Kennan and other senior statesmen had warned early on that NATO expansion would prove to be a “tragic mistake, [a] policy error of historic proportions.” It is now leading to rising tensions along the traditional invasion route, through which Russia was virtually destroyed twice during the past century by Germany alone. To make matters worse, in 2008 NATO membership was offered to Ukraine, the Russian geostrategic heartland, efforts later pursued by Obama and Hillary Clinton.

Let’s return finally to the main line of defense: functioning democracy. We can begin with the leader of the free world, the model of democracy for centuries.

In a democracy, the voice of the people is heard. Let’s ask what might happen in the United States if this principle were upheld. One consequence would be that the most popular and respected political figure in the country would have an influential role, maybe even be president. That’s Bernie Sanders, by a very large margin.

The Sanders campaign was the most remarkable feature of the 2016 elections. It broke the prevailing pattern of over a century of US political history. A substantial body of academic political science research establishes very convincingly that elections are pretty much bought: campaign funding alone is a remarkably good predictor of electability, for Congress as well, and also for decisions of elected officials. Research also shows that a considerable majority of the electorate, those lower on the income scale, are effectively disenfranchised, in that their representatives pay no attention to their preferences. As wealth increases, political representation does too, though only slightly—until you arrive at the very top, a fraction of 1 percent, where our policies are pretty much set.

The Sanders campaign broke sharply from that well-established model. Sanders was scarcely known. He had virtually no support from the main funding sources, the corporate sector and private wealth, was derided by the media, and he even dared to use the scare word “socialist.” Yet he probably would have won the Democratic nomination had it not been for shenanigans of the Obama-Clinton party managers.

Suppose he had won, or even that he had a major public platform today. We might then hear statements like this concerning labor rights: “I have no use for those—regardless of their political party—who hold some foolish dream of spinning the clock back to days when unorganized labor was a huddled, almost helpless mass . . . Only a handful of unreconstructed reactionaries harbor the ugly thought of breaking unions. Only a fool would try to deprive working men and women of the right to join the union of their choice.”

That’s not Sanders, however. The candidate who said that was Dwight Eisenhower, when he was running for president in 1952. Such was the voice

of conservatism during the days of the great growth period of regulated state capitalism, often called the economic “golden age.”

We’ve come a long way since then. Now we are on the verge of seeing the demise of even public unions, about the only sort that remains in the United States. Real democracy would be quite different, so public opinion studies show. Much the same holds for a host of other issues as both parties have shifted well to the right during the neoliberal period, with the Republicans now at a point where respected conservative political scientists describe them as a “radical insurgency” that has abandoned parliamentary politics.

One consequence is anger, frustration, and contempt for the formal institutions of democracy, reactions that often take ominous forms.

The basic fact is that a true majority of the population would never vote for the policies designed by elites. Some simple figures give a good indication why.

In 2007, before the crash, at the height of euphoria about the Great Moderation and the grand triumphs of neoliberalism and neoclassical economics, real wages of American workers were lower than they had been in 1979, when the neoliberal experiment was just taking off. One important reason was explained by Federal Reserve chair Alan Greenspan when he testified to Congress on the wondrous economy he was managing. He informed Congress that “greater worker insecurity” was keeping wages and inflation low. Workers are too intimidated to ask for decent wages, benefits, and working conditions, even in the late 1990s when unemployment was low —by neoliberal standards a sign of health of the economy.

Social justice measures also deteriorated through this period—the United States, in fact, ranks at the very bottom of the developed countries of the OECD in such measures, alongside of Greece, Mexico, and Turkey. But profits are booming, particularly in the largely predatory financial industry, which exploded during the neoliberal period, accounting for 40 percent of corporate profit right before the crash (for which they were, once again, largely responsible). One motive for the so-called reforms of neoliberalism was to reverse the falling rate of profit that was largely a consequence of popular activism and worker militancy in the 1960s. That was achieved, so in that sense the reforms were a success—for corporations, not for the population as a whole. Under such conditions, democracy can hardly be tolerated.

Much the same has been true in Europe under the lash of neoliberal austerity programs, which even IMF economists recognize to be unwarranted. But IMF bureaucrats listen to different voices—mostly those of the rich northern banks. Those are the voices that control the unelected troika that determines policy in Europe: the IMF, the European Central Bank, the European Commission.

In his important critical analysis of neoliberalism, *Failed,* economist Mark Weisbrot has carried out a careful and revealing investigation of the political agenda guiding the destructive economic policies. He studied the reports of the regular IMF consultations with member governments of the EU, and discovered “a remarkably consistent and disturbing pattern.” The financial crisis was exploited as an opportunity to lock in the neoliberal reforms: spending cuts in the public sector rather than tax increases, reduced benefits and public services, cuts in health care, undermining of collective bargaining, and in general moves to create a society “with less bargaining power for labor and lower wages, more inequality and poverty, a smaller government and social safety nets, and measures that reduce growth and employment.” “The IMF papers,” Weisbrot concludes, “detail the agenda of Europe’s decision-makers, and they have accomplished quite a bit of it over the past five years.” An agenda that is quite familiar where the neoliberal assault has proceeded.

In Europe, too, populations would not vote for these measures, so democracy must be sacrificed on the altar of locking in neoliberal reforms. The device in Europe is straightforward: transfer decision making to unelected bodies: the troika. The public response in Europe resembles what has been happening in the United States. Centrist political institutions are discredited, public disillusionment, fear, and anger are running high, sometimes taking quite ominous forms. Those old enough to remember the 1930s, as I do, cannot fail to be alarmed at the rise of neofascist parties, even in Austria and Germany, of all places, and not only there. And bitter memories are not easy to suppress when a majority of Europeans call for banning all Muslims from Europe, and many want to reverse the real achievements of the European Union, such as free movement of populations and erosion of national borders—which would be quite consistent with strengthening of cultural diversity in liberal and humane societies.

We cannot attribute all of these developments across the West to the neoliberal assault, but it is a common and significant factor.

Neoliberal policies are specifically directed toward undermining the regulatory power of the government, hence undermining the capacity to avert the blows of the sledgehammers. But the effects are more far-reaching. In our state capitalist societies, the power of the government is the power of the population, to the extent that the society is democratic. Neoliberal programs, by their very nature, tend to concentrate wealth in few hands while the majority stagnates or declines. Functioning democracy erodes as the natural effect of the concentration of economic power, which translates at once to political power, by familiar means but also for deeper and principled reasons. The doctrinal pretense is that transfer of decision making from the public sector to the “market” contributes to individual freedom, but reality is quite different. The transfer is from public institutions in which people have some say (insofar as democracy is functioning) to private tyrannies in which the public has no say at all: the corporations that dominate the global economy.

The policies are dedicated to making sure that “society no longer exists.” Such was Margaret Thatcher’s famous description of the world she perceived, or, more precisely, hoped to create. With these words, Thatcher unwittingly paraphrased Marx’s bitter condemnation of repression in France, which had left society as a “sack of potatoes,” an amorphous mass that cannot function. In the contemporary case, the tyrant is no longer an autocratic ruler, in the West at least, but instead concentrations of private power and bureaucracies that are free from public control.

There is also no guarantee that functioning democracy, with an informed and engaged population, would lead to policies that address human needs and concerns, including the concern for survival. But that remains our only hope.

All of which brings us back to Ernst Mayr’s question: Is it better to be smart than stupid? A question for you to ponder, and like it or not, for you to answer.

Without too much of a delay.

## All the Home You've Got

My uncle, the Baptist minister, whom I lived with in Haiti from the time that I was four years old to the time I was twelve, often used the expression *enfants de la promesse,* children of promise, to refer to children like me. The phrase was not meant to refer to our overall potential, but to the fact that we were born to Christian parents. Being a child of promise, in my particular case, also had to do with being born as a result of many promises.

It took five years from the time my parents were married for them to have me. And between their wedding night and the day I was born, there were a lot of prayers and tears. My father once told me that he’d wondered whether he would have to wait to be a hundred years old to become a father, like Abraham. So there were many promises made before I showed up. My mother had promised that she would consecrate her firstborn to Christ, that she would make sure the child walked no other path, that her first daughter or son would be a servant of the Lord. And my father promised God that he would stop smoking, that he would never so much as look at any other woman but my mother. He promised that he would never leave his children if he could help it. But there were many things that were beyond his and my mother’s control.

A few years after my birth, my parents left Haiti to seek a better home and future elsewhere, to escape a brutal dictatorship, to find work, to make money. And for all that to happen they had to leave me and my younger brother behind. So I was a child of promise, born out of pure faith, but a child, and later an adult, whose faith in any kind of home, would, just like my heart, completely break.

*Witness*

When I was ten years old, an older boy moved into my aunt and uncle’s house and every night for a few weeks, he would walk into the room where I and several girls slept and he would slip his hands under our nightgowns and touch our private parts. Our bunk beds were lined up near the linen-filled armoire from which he needed to get a set of sheets at night, and before he’d pick up the sheets he would touch us. Sometimes it was one or two of us. Sometimes it was all four of us, all of us too terrified to discuss what was going on even among ourselves, all of us too afraid that he might kill us if we screamed or told anyone else.

In that moment I would pretend that my body was no longer my own and that I had merged with the bedsheet. During the day, I would find certain objects to keep me from thinking about the night: self-made amulets in the form of beautiful black and brown women on toothpaste boxes. I would cut out these faces and their gleaming white teeth and I would think how lucky these women were because, since they neither had homes nor beds, no one could touch them in terrible ways. These ungrounded women could also shield me, I thought, by drawing me into whatever imaginary world they lived in, where people laughed all the time and had no vulnerable flesh.

I was afraid to write openly about these nights while my parents were still alive. I was afraid that it might upset them. My parents had left Haiti in the middle of a thirty-year dictatorship during which most people were being terrorized. A woman or girl being raped, or even killed, was not all that unusual. A girl could be walking down the street, she could even be on her way to school alone, and if one of the dictatorship’s henchmen decided he liked her, he could take her away. My aunt and uncle managed to protect me from the street threat. Yet they were not aware that the terror had walked inside their home.

As an adult at family gatherings, at mine or other people’s homes, I would sit quietly and listen to story after story of female relatives who had been asked to go to private houses, prisons, police stations, wearing their prettiest dresses to “convince” the colonel, general, foot soldier, or militia man who’d arrested their father, brother, uncle, cousin, not to kill their men. Sometimes the price of a loved one’s release was a young female relative’s virginity. But no one spoke about any of this until our female heroines had died.

Many of the women in my family covered up being abused with piousness. They wore white clothes and wrapped their hair with white scarves. They wore no jewelry or makeup. They prayed a lot. They tried to make themselves as white as the snow we had not yet seen, as white as light itself. They tried to become invisible.

The less of you that was seen the better, my aunt Denise liked to say. But it was no guarantee of protection, even in the dark, even inside your own home.

“I can’t always be where you are, but the more time you spend in church, the more eyes you have on you,” my father would say when I joined him and my mother in New York at age twelve.

Having eyes on you made it harder for people to hurt you because there were not only human eyes on you. God and his angels were also watching over you.
 *Prayer*

When I first wrote about this—as fiction—when I was twenty-three years old, this is some of what I wrote:

When I was a little girl, I had a small notebook made of a few folded sheets, held together by bamboo syrup. There, I sketched a series of stick figures, which were so closely drawn that they almost bumped each other off the page. My effigies were of a child who woke up in tears every morning to find her panties gone. There were never any bubbles over her scalp. No expressions nor conversations. There was just a burning ache between her thighs and a head that bent down to look and then somehow was never raised again . . .

I was forced to press my pillow farther against the wall when Aunt Denise’s godson Joel moved in. He was a tall, thin fifteen-year-old who looked like a man on account of a shaggy beard. He had just come from the hills of Léogâne and his whole body smelled like the wet clay that was still clinging to the straps of his brown sandals.

After he spent the first night in the far corner of the room, way over on the boys’ side, I woke up and found my panties gone.

I couldn’t string together the words to tell. (“Lost Shadows and Stick Figures,” *The Caribbean Writer,* volume 6, 1992)

I asked that this be published as fiction, but I am not sure it was. I find it interesting that in my fictional version, I put him in the same room with me

and the other girls, “way over on the boys’ side.” I also gave myself a notebook to write and draw images in. Reading this now, I wonder whether worse things happened to me than my protective childhood mind has allowed me to remember. But what I most want to hold on to now is the fact that words and images had become an alternate home, my safest place. My imagination had rescued me. My prayers had saved me too—I consider writing a kind of prayer—even though they had not been answered in the way I’d yearned for or expected.

A few years ago, I ran into Joel at my aunt and uncle’s house in Haiti after my aunt had died. I stood away from him, and though I had both dreaded and rehearsed this encounter over and over in my mind for years, I did not publicly blurt out what he had done to me. I did not cry or run away either. I did not even cringe. I answered his hello and looked into his eyes, and though I saw no visible sign of remorse or soul-searching there, it was the first time in my life that I stopped praying for his death. He was now a shadow to me. I had escaped his grasp, and strangely enough, my imperfect faith in God, which had led me to supplement my prayers with my own protective visions of those bodiless women, had been a big part of my being able to stand in the same room as Joel and mourn the same loved one.

I am still waiting to experience both perfect forgiveness and perfect faith, though. I am not yet able to love my enemies the same way I love my friends. I am unable to pray for those who persecute me beyond praying for them to stop persecuting me. But I am still praying that this particular persecution will not follow me all the days of my life.

I have always had low religious self-esteem. Whenever I am in a church, be it my home church or a church I am visiting, there is always a moment when I expect someone to walk over and escort me out, saying, “This is not your place. You don’t belong here. We are kicking you out.

The feeling that God let me down by allowing Joel to touch me sometimes makes my faith plummet in a way that is as clear to me as a special-effects meteorite in a movie. But it is much harder for me to express how my survival of this ordeal is what keeps making my faith rebound—not just my being alive, but being able to love my husband, and my two daughters, being able to write my stories, and also to contribute some things, both tangible and intangible, to the world we all live in.

Many of the people I grew up with, some of whom are now pastors and choir directors and other functionaries in different types of churches, are very happy to see me in church. But others, armed with public revelations that writers directly or indirectly make in their work, are hell-bent on seeing me draw a line in the sand and make a clear declaration of “pure and absolute faith,” as one friend put it.

For a long time, a childhood friend would email me accounts of dreams that she’d had about me and my family. Her most consistent dream about me involved my having sold my soul to the devil, unwillingly, in my sleep. She could tell by the things I had been writing, she said, and by the fact that I refused to write Christian stories.

“You might have strayed too far from home,” she once wrote me, “a little or a lot from the path your uncle and parents taught you. Jesus does not do in- between or lukewarm. You’re either inside his kingdom or out in the cold.”

I felt condemned by this person because she had very accurately described my often wavering faith, which could be lukewarm or sometimes cold. At times it was because of gatekeepers like her, whose level of certainty I could never match. But most of the time it was because my imagination would not allow me to constrain myself to one set of beliefs, one set of people, and one set of “certainties.” As a writer, I told myself, I had to live in other spaces, in other bodies, in other homes, in other minds, in order to convincingly create my characters, which, if I am lucky, represent a whole range of beliefs, lifestyles, moralities, and hopes and dreams.

“This kind of thinking is a certain road to hell,” another *enfant de la promesse,* who actually fulfilled her religious promise and was attending a theological seminary, told me.

None of this shocks or offends me; I grew up with a minister after all. Hell was not just other people, but even deviant thoughts, which is a minefield for fiction. I understand drawing lines and unambiguity. I understand not compromising. I understand you’re either with us or against us. But that is just not me. Besides, I’m not always sure who “us” is. Is it the gatekeepers to our celestial home? Is it God? Might “us” not also be a group of wounded people whose faith often wavers but who are still seeking a home in God?

Whenever my faith wavers, I try to stick to the basics. I am not expecting any cookies for it, but I still believe in prayer and I still believe in God. I understand, as my minister uncle used to say, that the Bible has many contradictions. I am still struggling with the way these contradictions are

often used by human beings to hurt, and even assault, others. Yet I want to respect other people’s religions. I want—need—to seek inspiration in the stories of strong people from a whole range of faiths and religious paths.

In the strict religious environment in which I grew up, that makes me a heretic, and a messy one at that. A heretic who refuses to wander off too far, to not believe at all, yet still continues to walk around with a messy and incomplete faith that sometimes feels like living in a half-finished house.

One thing trauma and the resulting restlessness keeps reminding me is that we are all born vulnerable. Unlike an actual house we are not made of wood, stone, concrete, mortar, or cement. We are easily broken, and we might end up spending the rest of our lives trying to find some way to fix that brokenness. One can still learn, though, from other wounded people—real or fictional—whose faith seems complete, “finished,” people whose faith is— or feels—actually like home. One of those folks for me is the lay preacher Baby Suggs in Toni Morrison’s novel *Beloved.*

I sometimes find myself prayerfully muttering a few lines from one of her outdoor sermons.

“Here,” she said, “in this here place, we flesh; flesh that weeps, laughs; flesh that dances on bare feet in grass. Love it. Love it hard.”

Reading this, I always imagine her meaning that sometimes our bodies are all the home we’ve got.

Then I whisper, *Amen, Sister, Amen.*

## Land of Darkness

I am the only writer ever, as far as we know, to have lived undercover in North Korea, immersed within the system to investigate the place. In 2011 I took my fifth trip into Pyongyang, where, under the guise of being a missionary and an ESL teacher, I lived for six months with 270 North Korean males in a military compound. For this act, I am often described as “fearless.” People call me brave. But even if it sounds illogical, I consider myself to be a very fearful person. Even more, I believe my fearfulness is the only way I can begin to explain my time undercover in the gulag nation.

North Korea is perhaps the darkest place in the world. The country lacks electricity; everything is gray and monotone, and the only meaning is given to the Great Leader, an authoritarian, godlike persona now worn for the third generation by thirty-three-year-old Kim Jong Un, who is considered the sun, though that sun exudes no warmth for its people. No other contemporary country is so entirely devoid of light.

I have always been afraid of the dark. I rarely dream, and I used to sleepwalk as a child to escape the pitch-blackness of being asleep. Even now, I cannot turn the light off at night. This is a dreary habit since artificial light is so disruptive that I almost never sleep well. But my fear of the dark is overpowering; I would rather forsake good sleep if it means keeping the darkness at bay.

Morning brings no relief. I often wake with a sinking feeling, then spend many early hours staring at unopened emails with dread, ill at ease with facing a shared territory of interaction. I have even been avoiding emails about this essay, which I’ve been afraid to start for weeks. I disabled the calendar app on my phone so that I would not be reminded of the

approaching deadline. I recently had to fly from New York to Seoul, and the reasons for that trip became secondary to the flight itself, which suggested to me a fourteen-hour-long refuge when no one would be able to reach me or expect me to reciprocate.

I experience the world, that is, as a map of fears to navigate, its coordinates all shattering bits coming at uneven speeds. This feeling has dogged me for as long as I can remember, and the map operates as a knot growing more tangled within me each day. Parts of it—the toughest paths to fathom—have been there for as long as I can recall. One of these paths leads back to North Korea, which often seems to me the dark night from which I have run all my life.

My family was separated by the Korean War, and I was born and raised in South Korea. When I was twelve, my father, who had been a millionaire, suddenly went bankrupt. In the middle of the night, I was awakened and shoved into a car and driven off to a city far away, to a relative’s house, where I waited for my parents to join me. Because bankruptcy is punishable there by jail, my parents had gone into hiding. I was a child and didn’t understand, so I waited, every day expecting their return. But I didn’t see them again until a year later, at John F. Kennedy Airport, in New York, after our family had fled Korea.

Predictably, I don’t remember much of that year of waiting; that time remains in my mind as a hollow darkness from which the only sensation I recall is that of a thirst, the huge, bottomless kind that cannot be quenched. The darkness did not lift even when I immigrated to America and became reunited with my parents, now penniless. I did not speak a word of English. Everything I knew simply vanished in one instant, and I got stuck, I think, in the shadowy nook where I hid as a girl, aged twelve.

Perhaps because of all this, I am good at waiting. I can wait for days and years, through rain and storm—even through darkness—and hardly ever ask questions. Somewhere deep in my mind, I must imagine that if I am quiet and good, my parents will come back. I could have made, I suppose, a very good wife to a very conservative man. But instead I became a writer in the English language despite, or maybe because of, the fact that English, which I adopted as a teen, was another road on my map of fear.

As I write this, I’m reminded of a well near my childhood home. It was a deep, old-fashioned, cylindrical well made of stone, and the neighborhood kids played around it, throwing things and shouting into its vault to hear the

echo. I was always terrified of it and never went near. Later in life I became briefly fixated with the work of Haruki Murakami because he kept using wells as symbols in his novels. But eventually I got bored of reading him; I realized that it wasn’t Murakami’s writing that haunted me but the well from my childhood. My passion for his work was just the flip side of a stronger fear.

How all this relates to North Korea might seem, I realize, abstract. I can’t say it provides direct explanation. Perhaps I traveled to the darkest place on earth because I empathized with its citizens, who are stuck in that darkness and cannot get out. Perhaps their voicelessness became mine because it reminded me of my own powerlessness. Or it’s possible that North Korea, in some ethereal way, became a kind of darkest night, the longest wait, the well from my childhood.

I pursued coverage of the country for a decade, every step of the way nearly paralyzed with fear. I was not one of those intrepid foreign correspondents who jump into war zones, nor did I have a team of editors, fixers, and photographers working alongside to help figure out the logistics and arrange the precautionary backups. Although I signed a book contract long before 2011—when I finally dove into Pyongyang for those six months —my meager contract was just a piece of paper with a vague deadline, never a support network I could rely on for protection. In Pyongyang I was watched around the clock by the minders who lived directly below me in a dormitory under complete surveillance. My classes were recorded and reported on, and I had to get permission for every lesson from the North Korean staff. I saved my notes on USB sticks, which I kept on my body at all times. I made sure to delete my traces from my laptop every time I signed off. I saved a backup copy on an SD card, which I hid in different spots in the room, always with the light off. I created a document within a document, burying the notes in the middle of what looked like class lesson material. I was utterly on my own and knew no one who could come to my rescue if I were caught with the four hundred pages of notes I had taken in secret. The most likely scenario was that I would vanish in that bleak, dark unknown.

North Korea is the most inaccessible country in the world, and its regime has committed human rights abuses at a scale, according to the United Nations, “without parallel in the contemporary world.” It is a society built entirely on fears. Its dictators have manipulated and exploited human frailties to

incorporate them into its system of control and abuse. Its citizens cannot leave the country, and their movement within it is restricted. Information is censored, and every interaction is surveilled. Education is only about the cult of the Great Leader, as is the media, and the citizens are treated as slaves and soldiers to uphold the myth. Those who enter its borders without permission or who commit acts that are forbidden by the regime—even something as seemingly innocuous as ripping a poster of their Great Leader—can face sentences of more than a decade of hard labor. Public execution is sanctioned by the regime, which is also known for kidnapping foreigners. No one with any sense of self-preservation would sneak into North Korea to write a book.

This leads people back home in the United States, or in South Korea or Europe, where I’ve traveled in recent years to give talks—the same people who like to call me fearless and brave—to ask the inevitable questions: Wasn’t I scared? And why did I go?

These questions always give me pause. Perhaps it is a natural human instinct to look for a neat, rational motive for any story that seems incredible. Readers often want to identify with their narrator and the reasons for her action, or perhaps they just want to be assured that the author of a story is not out of her mind. Some years ago, when I published my first novel, there were readers who seemed to take personal offense at the story being open-ended. A few even told me I should write a sequel to redo the ending with a proper conclusion.

Yet such an instinct is self-defeating; no true story worth anyone’s time operates according to a predictable pattern. Accepted plots are almost always contrived. It is entirely possible to be scared and not scared at the same time, though this idea is rarely allowed. Such a blurred line reminds us how limited our agency is to control our circumstances; this mathematics of fear leaves no such gray area. In our attempt to be satisfied with a story’s arc, we like to contain ourselves to a one-dimensional narrative of a hero fighting evil, although we know that life is almost always somewhere in between.

One of the questions I am most frequently asked about North Korea is whether the people there are “brainwashed under their Great Leader.” The question strikes me as deeply patronizing; citizens there are not simplistic robots. They may believe and not believe all at once. My North Korean students would, in unison, swear against the imperialist America and its puppet South Korea as their chief enemies and say that if a war broke out, they would kill their enemies without hesitation. But when I asked them,

“What about me? I’m both South Korean and American,” they looked embarrassed and laughed shyly, mumbling, “But you are our teacher. You are different.”

Isn’t this the kind of paradox by which the human mind works? There is a place in our being that allows for simultaneous belief in something while knowing it not to be true—or for calmly speaking with students in a classroom while experiencing absolute terror about the consequences of being found out by authorities. I think of it as a kind of blind spot.

Despite the differences in circumstances in America, we have seen plenty of examples of the blind spot operating through the recent election cycle. It appears that an overwhelming sector of the population became convinced that a real estate guy who played a boss firing people for eleven years on a popular reality TV show was uniquely qualified to lead the nation. Even in this country, where celebrity prestige seems to dictate the public conscience, it cannot be that people would confuse playing the boss on television with having anything to do with being the actual boss of a nation—but perhaps such was the comfort of indoctrinated habit. It’s of a piece with an American psychology that has allowed joking about the Great Leader to be our cultural norm. Movies like the animated *Team America: World Police* and the comedy *The Interview* are among the most popular reference points for North Korea; a country where twenty-five million people are currently being trapped and tortured has largely been figured into American mainstream culture as the butt of jokes.

Every time someone in an audience asks me how and whether all North Koreans are brainwashed, I am struck by how unintelligible such a question is, and how much it assumes a fundamental difference between the operations of their own minds and the minds of North Koreans. I often feel I am watching an object of fear grow to dominate the audience member’s brain and arrest their understanding. Perhaps there is a comfort in denying North Koreans their humanity, distancing their experiences as unreal. To do so allows us to have no obligation and responsibility to them, and it frees us from the vague sense of our complicity. They cannot touch us. The blind spot allows a person in such a situation to feign an act of agency that masks a deeper lack of agency; it is at once willful ignorance and knee-jerk self- protection.

Each time someone calls me fearless, I think of this blind spot, as I believe it helps explain my time in North Korea. I do not mean to suggest that I was

naive to its dangers, but that each time I thought about being caught, I blocked the matching pangs of fear that came, attempted to usher them away from the front of my consciousness as well as I could.

In Pyongyang I was allowed to leave the campus only in a group with minders for a few hours on weekends, and my days were meticulously mapped out, so the only break I got was to jog in a circle around the tiny campus. I wore the mini USB sticks containing the notes for my book on a necklace as pendants, and I always feared that the strand might loosen and slip off me while I was not paying attention. In those passing moments, when the possibility of being discovered struck me as an impending, inevitable doom, my breath would catch, and as a kind of survival mechanism, I would shut my eyes and push away the thought.

It often seems to me that the desire to comprehend fear strikes at a mystery at the center of life. We breathe toward death; each moment alive is a clock tick toward not living any longer. There is no happy ending, and to help all this make sense to us, we repeat histories, fight needless wars, recite prayers, and fall in love, often more than once, with people who will break our hearts. Life is born from those blind spots, with each mishap, every accident.

Because I identify with fear, I turned out to be, as much as one can be, well suited to pursue North Korea and to bear each frightening day there as if I were a researcher at a laboratory working on a case. I did not count on caring so much for my students, but I did, and that consequence was afforded to me by my own blind spot. Each interaction surprised me, shocked me from unknowing to knowing, gave me names and faces toward a deeper understanding of the North Korean horror. The dark stopped being dark for one illuminating second at a time, and even if night returned each time to blacken the sky completely, the darkness that followed was never quite the same.

There is no full circle, tidy conclusion, or simple solution to any of this. I am still scared of North Korea. My inbox is full of unread emails. Mornings are hard, and I try to avoid reading breaking news from above the thirty- eighth parallel, which is inevitably negative; two Americans from the school where I was undercover are being held hostage by the regime. When I finally do glance at the news, I don’t look at photos because I am afraid that I might see the faces of my students, which would make me tumble and lose my precarious balance.

Sometimes I still fear that it will all come to haunt me one day, that someone sent by the Great Leader will find me while I am traveling somewhere far away from home, and that I will either be taken back to Pyongyang or be punished for writing about what they did not want revealed. But each time my mind goes there, I stop myself, and though it is not clear where my thoughts retract to, there is often a lull; for a brief moment I am numb, and fear cannot get to me.
